Okay. Right, well done. Excellent. Okay.
So this is, Apart which will come probably partly at the end. And partly at the beginning.
And he wants to, it's going to deal with the technology of creating, semantic material automatically from non-smantic material.
But I just want to say a little bit about the history and, where what we're doing fits into.
The general development of information. Now, what we are doing is actually quite Revolution. But, it built from a concept which was popularized by Vannevar Bush.
1,945. So that's, 80 years ago.
You can see my screen, can't you?
Right, okay. And he came up with the idea of a device called the Memex. Which would store everything that went on books records communications as fast as possible.
Yes.
And it was an automatic personal filing system. Have any of you ever, use filing cards?
So I think I'll just show you. This, we don't use them anymore.
But this is a, convenient, file card system. Can you see a bit of that?
And within it individual cards that you write on okay that's called a filing card system And this is called a file.
And That is how, library catalogues were organized. And how many of them still are.
Organized. So if you go into some libraries you'll find massive cabinets which consist of file cards and that's really influenced Rangap in his faceted.
Classification. Now, Bush was later, 1945, and he came up with the idea of something which would record everything you did.
That was a, Hi, for, some, time, but then, and he came up with a fanciful machine.
So this is a typical example. Of what the machine might look like. You can see it's got various tablets on the top, so that's very, advanced And, it's got, I think these are recording on tape.
This is, I think. Computer tape at that stage, magnetic tape. Okay.
So, So the idea here is to come up with something that records everything and makes it.
He and natural to find anything you want. And people been working on this for 50. Or more years.
Now. The other thing I want to talk about is recording at source. So what we do, is we use something called Open Notebook science.
And I will.
This was pioneered by Donco Bradley. And it is the practice of making the entire primary record of a research project.
Publicly available online. As it is recorded. So. It was promoted by, Jean Claude Bradley, and actually, he was going to call it open science, but I persuaded him to call it open notebook science.
And Here's a picture of John Code. And, this was so important, that, He was honored by President Obama.
He died tragically young? And I and others organized a memorial. Symposium in Cambridge to honor his legacy.
So. Hey, his idea is that everything you do is available to the whole world as you do it.
And we have been, taking that idea, and trying to put it into practice. It's difficult mainly because the tools don't exist and because the culture needs changing.
People are trained in universities very often to keep everything. To themselves, particularly if they're going to be assessed.
And, researchers, have the culture that they, the primary purpose of research is to compete against other researchers.
So open notebook science It's taking a long time. Develop. But at least the preprint culture is part of the way the towards it.
The problem we have in publication at the moment and Ranganison would undoubtedly have had, things to say about this is that you create your primary record let's say in a laboratory notebook where you write it in or type it in and you collect data off a an instrument.
And then. You transcribe this to, paper. Often with loss of information both mistakes and omissions and then you published the paper which is a snapshot of that research.
Now we know that what we're doing is dynamic. So we are doing this day by day. We're capturing it day by day.
And a snapshot does not give the totality. So, current message of static publication do not capture the full dynamic range of what we're doing.
So having said that, I now want to move on to the technical details as to how we create, semantic information.
We are not doing experiments. We are, creating recordings. Talks. Software and so on and as far as possible we're doing that under the open notebook for philosophy.
That is that people have access to it as soon as it is created. Github has that, facility so that as soon as you create.
A piece of software. You, Up, load it to a public repository.
Usually with only a a delay of about. You know, a day or something of that sort. And that was very much the ethos of the human genome project, which, worked on the basis that all sequences they collected were uploaded to sample repositories by the end of the day.
And that's 1 of the great, examples of open the notebook science. It's actually predated the term.
It was called the Bermuda protocol. And it's a milestone.
And open source. And it's a great pity that we have moved to the situation where people are obsessed with measuring their performance.
With metrics and those metrics are controlled by the publishers and the publishers have no interest.
In open notebook science or anything open. So. That's something which will need to be built into the system in the future.
So when Doing what we can with that, but our main activity of semantic output. Is, the different windows we have on climate.
We have, PYGET papers and dock analysis. Which allow us to search the literature recently this has been extended with open Alex.
And, we can search. Tens of millions of scholarly articles for climate information
We can normally retrieve the metadata for that, and in some cases we can automatically record the PDF or in cases where it's been published fully open in the
Pubmed Central System, we're able to read the XML as well.
That's semi semantic in that the document has semantic structure, but for the body of the work.
It doesn't have semantic labeling, on the components.
But we are working on, making that more and more semantic labeling paragraphs, so on and that's available in the output of dock analysis, and Aimee.
So that's a fully semantic. Structure but not necessarily annotated with a schema which is universal.
Then we have, the, FCC reports. And again, that's lower priority than the IPCC material at the moment.
But the FCC reports are. A list of several 100 I think several 100.
Pdf. Documents. They are not semantic.
They have no markup and no annotation, but they are written in a consistent format. So we're able to essentially build a template.
Or the IPCC. And turn that into something with. A considerable degree of That's semantic.
Macro and micro structure and with some of the terms. Identified and labeled. But the main enhancement of that comes with our ability to search the generated HTML.
And to link that into. Our glossary system. So we'll come to the IPCC glossary.
Now glossary is absolutely essential to and adding, and understanding and markup. The terms that are used are glossary.
Dictionary. And sometimes. And so on. But, We use the word dictionary, but it is a very loose term.
And it allows
Supportive glossary operations. So the IPCC call that. Now, the IPCC glossary.
Is available in EDF form. I think I have to check that. But it's available in a rather inaccessible, HTML, form.
It has. Entries for each term, which are separate downloads. So I'll just have a look and see if we can find IPCC.
Right. So this is it. It's got these terms here. And you can click on this.
So if we were interested in which we saw earlier today. You click on that and it gives the definition and the parent.
At 10. But this is in HTML which is not easily downloadable and because it's served by a servant.
Which requires some. Intelligence on the research. Receiving and So, IS, G, again, was able to, write, headless browser tool that allows us to download all of this.
Automatically. And the results of this are about 700 terms, which, are available in that sort of form.
I'm which have been put into the glossary that Simon, Worthington has transformed into semantic HTML.
So that's glossary. Now that glossary is a universal glossary for all the reports.
But there are also individual glossaries. Chap. No, each working group. So if I go into.
Hi PCC. Kamliji 3.
We have an annex. And this glossary here. Is a PDF file. So that you see, it's got to be transformed.
Into something more useful and it does not overlap. It's overlaps a lot with that.
Communal glossary, but it does have terms which are not in the communal gloss. So by downloading all the glossaries or the individual chapters we can.
Enhance that central glossary. And we're doing so as well. And then the other thing that some of the.
Reports but not all of them do. Is they give abbreviations. Annexes.
Okay, I'm sorry. Johnloads and I think that's PDF. Acronyms, that's it.
So if we look at acronyms. Downloads.
Yeah, we got that. And this is PDF. And these are the acronyms which are particularly relevant to W 3.
So.
50 acronyms a page. And we've got about 7 or 8 pages. So we've got a few 100 acronyms.
And if we collect together all the acronyms. That we've got from the various working groups.
Then. We'll be able to have something which is much larger.
But you see this act this one WG 3 doesn't have a marker in it. I'll have a quick look and see whether anything in WG.
One.
But page not found, I expected that.
I won't spend time. Going working group. And
Yeah. This is, I find extremely difficult to navigate.
Here's physical science.
I don't see anything there about acronyms at all. So each report is different.
But, we can hopefully between us now, collect all that together. So I expect at our glossary consists of Probably about
I'm going to guess about 1,500 terms, that, there will be probably an additional, 3 or 400.
Acronyms which are not. In those terms. And so we're going to end up with somewhere around about 2,000 and entries in this glossary.
And we will automatically look them up in Wikipedia and weiki data wherever possible.
So that's a glossary. The glossary is there to inform us, but it's also there to create search terms.
So that, we will probably, go through the process of, adding regular expression search terms.
To many of the terms in the glossary. The good thing is it's a static glossary, so we probably only need to do it.
Okay, that's, the glossary. Then. I've talked about the FCC, haven't I?
I just to say that we can use the glossary to search the FCC. And, add, semantic meaning to the term.
So if it contains something like I don't know. In there anywhere then, we can link this to.
And then finally we come to the IPCC chapters. The IPCC chapters are primarily made available.
In PDF.
So if we go into let's say WG one. Yeah, and we've got something that says
We're on the chances.
I think we have to go into reports.
Read the report.
Maybe I put.
I think this will do it for us. So yes, so we go into. This, and we go to downloads.
Thank you.
And these are chapter in PDF. But if you go to the Explore button here this is the HTML and you will see it contains expand and contract.
Sections. Now. To get that down, we have to use a headless browser, which our, created and it's possible to download all those reports in full, with the headless browser.
Technology. So we work mainly from the. Html and not from the PDF.
When we've got the HTML, what we then, need to do is to make it semantic.
You will see here that if I go into this section, one dot one. Then it has a subsection.
Oh, this is probably a subsection. This is section one. No, this. What's this number?
I think this is chapter one. Chapter one. Section one.
Subsection one. And sometimes we go down to
Sub sub sections. I don't know if it does it here.
Some of them are more deeply nested than others. And this is. A bot?
This is a figure. So we can get down the figures and the captions to the figures are really important here.
And one or 2 other things to note. Is that there are some hyperlinks here. So pointing into sections.
And at the end of some of them.
There are links to other.
These are links, sometimes 2 references. Cross chapter box. And here you can see we've actually got a link to another section.
One dot 2 dot.
Not very easy to navigate, is it? So we try and honor all of these sections here.
And make it easy to navigate. So we have semantic. Labelling for all of the parts and if I go into on these here.
It's not a good example going to this.
Yeah, this one contains 1. 2 3 4
Powerographs and a box.
And 5. 6, 7. So the paragraphs will be numbered paragraph one to 7, and the box will be, labeled with its particular identity, fire here, which should be universal across the system.
So, what we're immediately offering is a navigation system. That. As far as I know, nobody else.
Offered and it will should be much easier to use. Than the HTML you've got here.
We've got some work to do on that because, this is, if we open this up.
In Come back here, open it up. And
This you will see that this has got. Gatsby display markup. So that doesn't have any semantic meaning.
Gatsby focus wrapper. Has no meaning in terms of climate change. And so on and many of these can probably be ignored.
But when we finally come down to
Sections here. We've got, titles here which That tells what the various sections are.
So we will have a semi-smantic. A set of components from the IPCC chapters and that's probably.
That and the glossary are our main. Thrusts at the moment. The pie get paper stuff.
Will come. And but, the drawback to that is. And that we have to do more work on the actual content.
To So I think I've said most of what I want to say. In all of this.
We've got 3. Main sections. We've got the introduction about climate change and, Oh, we've got a main body about, and all of the components.
What they are and then at the end we've got a technical section on how we analyze this and make these a magnification.
Automatic. Simon is talking about all the social aspects of semantic climate. So are there.
Comments or questions in particular what have I missed out?
So basically, you're not just, talked about the.
Yep, well done. We're going to, we're going to talk about that. So we talked about what we were going to do but not how we were going to do it.
Hmm.
Very good thinking indeed. So. Our software, so this is another section, our software, is developed in a modular fashion.
And here I'm going to show my pie chum. Display of this. There is a general component called Amy Lib.
Yeah. And, is a collection of libraries. Which are generally useful for documents.
And analysis classification, cementification. Reuse and republicate. So they apply to any set of documents.
In principle. Without going through all of them We have something that deals with the bibliography.
Tools that deal with CSV. I've recently added a tool which supports dictionaries so that we can create dictionaries easily and we can used it for annotation.
The library for HTML. Library on natural language processing routines. Library on converting PDF.
Which is a key thing since we get so much PDF. Small one on SVG.
So we're possible. We convert the graphics to SVG, which is a semantically structured.
Tool. We got utilities, headless browser driver. Rounding boxes.
File utilities at this browser game. Various. Things for the command line, HTML logs and Yeah, fogs.
And we were allowed one for dictionary. And various HTML tools. And then look up for Wikimedia and libraries for XML.
Many of these are convenience libraries, which means that, we have a wrap around some of the more.
Difficult parts of Python. So how do I join a list? With, commerce.
And then Formal way of doing that is very arcane for people just learning computer science, computer.
Systems. And so on. So that's Amy Lib. And then with each.
L, we have an extensive set of tests. So These are the tests. We've just started to include and so for example, yes test.
Set of dictionary tests. And I go here and press. And so.
Yeah. Is a class with all the tests and and I think it's got nearly 60 tests.
So here you see. Look up missing wiki data IDs by term. Debug chapter dictionaries.
This, ambiguate wiki data IDs. Create dictionary from a list of strings you will all be doing that because you're creating a list of terms you're interested in.
Some of them are just, addiction, so, ethnobotanics and So on.
Some of them maybe.
Skipped if there are too many of them but this actually runs quite quickly. Add second list of entries.
I don't think we would term. Get wiki data of 1st entry. And sound a whole lot of tests.
So let me run this.
A good thing about running it is If it doesn't work, then.
I have an incentive to do this, but hopefully.
Well, it's still red, which means it's running.
Tests. So that's our test should run. There's no very little download in this. We've got 86 tests.
It's finished in 21 seconds for me. 7 tests failed. And I can have a look and see why those tests failed.
They're yellow.
But, file should exist. So. There is a test file in my previous incarnation. Of this called pi for Amy.
I haven't copied it over so that's very clear.
Files that exist.
Right cannot open. I've got a software error there. I've got to mend that.
File should exist.
Miles should exist.
This is an error which you should recognize non-type object as no attributes get or create.
Something or other. What it means is you created an object which you're going to do something with.
And it turned out that that object didn't get created. And so you had a none object instead.
So. Okay, get used to that. And that's so we got 5 did not exist. I have to mend that.
We've got one, Well, we've got none object. I've got to debug that.
And then we've got some other I've got to men. So I'm feeling quite optimistic about that when I get some time.
I will mend that and commit it. No, in this that we
We have down here, GET.
And I'm on TMR Dick's at the moment. So I've got several branches.
PMR test is where I was, developing some of the Amy, staff, the dict is something, related to dictionary so you can develop different things at the same time.
And none of this will cause problems for Nitica who's got her own branch. Which is called, nitica test or something of that sort.
And which she can commit up to the, the main. If necessary.
At some stage we need to merge this. Merging it's easy if you do it frequently and it's a nightmare.
If you take months, before you do it. So at some stage, I will merge this back.
You will then find that, your, tests have errors, and we have to then mendows.
And commit a greater a larger and enhanced main first.st But that's Oh yes, remote.
Nitica test, they are.
So, so. All of that works, very nicely. Or. I.
And then the next thing. I'm going to show you is.
Hey, climate.
Recent projects, in climate. So here is. And time it.
And here again, we work it by having tests. There's a whole lot of test data here.
So you can see I've got captors in here to read. And in particular one called, content.
Which should approximate the final versions of the particular I think so, it's not.
Comprehensive but I probably will make it comprehensive so so that those people who got chapters will have a semantic version of their chapter because at the moment there's some problem about headless browsers with some of you.
So we will create that. It doesn't. Logically fit in test. I should.
It possible to put it somewhere in the system. What I'm likely to do, is to create a dictionary.
Direct for somewhere in the system. And we might ask everybody to have a directory under their home directory called dictionary where the dictionaries are put.
Or we'll probably call it, . Something of that sort. It's, always difficult because it depends on people.
How people use things, but you may need to check out separate repository with all this stuff in.
And we will probably call it semantic time. I think we've got a semantic climate dictionary somewhere.
So, Amy Climate, will look at the, Tests. So. Let's look at test IPCC.
Here is our structure. And here we've got about. 30 tests. And you can see things like remove cats being mark up.
Remove wordpress mark up At 6 WT 3 and index chapters with IDs. So that looks like a pretty important one because.
Let's see what it does. We chapter, search for words and return a list of paragraphs in which they're So.
Hey, we're looking for these phrases. We're reading in WT. 3 chapter 3.
With the HTML with IDs, which is our, more or less final version.
And then we will end up with some paragraphs here. Now, what we probably want to do is to save those.
To file. Although some of these others.
This one I think actually creates. Files. Not well documented. I certainly don't want to go through to at the moment, but we'll do that in our next debug system.
So you can see how the tests develop here relate to the operations we want to carry out. So well done, Renault 4.
Bringing that up. So we have 2 main libraries for Amy the general Amy Lib, which you generally won't do very much with, and the Emmy climate library, where you can develop it.
Researching the climate literature. I should also mention that we have
I get papers here. So Iish as recently updated PIE get papers. And, so there's a repository here about, get papers.
And. Somewhere or other we should have a
One for dockanellas.
Yeah, we are.
So this is docanalysis. Dark analysis. Doesn't have any, tests on it.
It should do. And that's something which may be some of you can help.
By writings and tests for. Dock analysis. Very well. Got very good documentation.
But I don't think it's got any tests. And so having tests is valuable because it's a way of making sure that it continues to work.
Even if you do things like upgrade, Python and so forth. So does that.
We've also got dictionaries in the system. I will mention Try and find them.
See if they're not.
So I just mentioned this. We got dictionaries here under CEV open we've got things like compounds and genus and plant parts and things like that.
And there are other ones which we've created. Which will do things like poverty and goodness knows what we've got a lot of Dixon is a pretty the very variable in form and so on.
And what we need to do is to come up with a good way of creating those dictionaries, rapidly, automating as much of the process as possible and then using them to search and classify the material.
We've got and to understand it when we've read it.
So, Reno, thank you for that. Have we covered nearly everything?
Yes, we do.
Good. Any questions from? Anyone.
They can be as simple as possible, don't worry.
Hmm.
You understand all of it or your brain is completely frazzled because we've gone on for too long.
Okay. Maybe they are tired enough.
And date. Absolutely. Okay, so let's make sure we know save things okay. We are going to we're going to close the recording 1st of all.
Yes.
It's not.
Is that right?
Yes.